GH-46209: [Documentation][C++][Compute] Add cpp developer documentation for row table (#46210)
apache/arrow: docs/source/developers/cpp/compute.rst

.. Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
.. or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
.. distributed with this work for additional information
.. regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
.. to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
.. "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
.. with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

.. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
.. software distributed under the License is distributed on an
.. "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
.. KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
.. specific language governing permissions and limitations
.. under the License.

.. highlight:: console
.. _development-cpp-compute:

============================
Developing Arrow C++ Compute
============================

> This section provides information for developers of Arrow C++ Compute module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section provides information for developers of the Arrow C++ Compute module.
```

Author: Nice catch. Thanks!

Row Table
=========

The row table in Arrow represents data stored in row-major format. This format
is particularly useful for scenarios involving random access to individual rows
and where all columns are frequently accessed together. It is especially
advantageous for hash-table keys and facilitates efficient operations such as
grouping and hash joins by optimizing memory access patterns and data locality.

Fixed-length vs. Varying-length
-------------------------------

A key property of the row table is whether it is fixed-length or varying-length.
A fixed-length row table contains only fixed-length columns, while a
varying-length row table includes at least one varying-length column. This

> distinction determines how data is stored and accessed in the row table.

Reviewer: I think this is confusingly worded or maybe I misunderstand. "varying-length column" implies to me the number of records/rows is what varies but I think, in this API, we're allowing the number of fields in a row to vary. i.e., each row is either an n-tuple where n is fixed or where n can vary. The text below this also uses language which maybe could be clearer. Such as,

> column in that row is null

could be

> field in that row is null

What do you think?

Author: Yes, I agree this can be misleading. I tent to keep using this wording because they are the same as the names of variable/function/comment in the codebase, and IMO it can build direct mapping from doc to code. To disambiguate , how about `fixed-length column` -> `fixed-length type column (hereinafter "fixed-length column")` and `varying-length column` -> `varying-length length column (hereinafter "varying-length column")`.

Author: Oh, and to be clear, a row table is fully schema-ed. That is, each row contains the same number of columns/fields, in the same types and order as specified in the schema.

Author: The text below this also uses language which maybe could be clearer. Such as,
> 
> > column in that row is null
> 
> could be
> 
> > field in that row is null
> 
> What do you think?

I think in the context of the row table, "column" and "field" can be used interchangeably? Will it feel less confusing after the explanation I made above?

Author: > Oh, and to be clear, a row table is fully schema-ed. That is, each row contains the same number of columns/fields, in the same types and order as specified in the schema.

Maybe I should add this in the doc too.

Reviewer: Ah, I see your point about matching the language here with what's already in the docstrings. Maybe it's not so confusing to people as you have it then. I don't think clarifying (like "fixed-length type column (hereinafter "fixed-length column")") is needed then.

Author: Hi @amoeba , I've restructured the doc a bit, by introducing a "Metadata" section that includes some description about the schema-ful nature of a row table, and fixed-length/varying-length columns derived from the schema. Also the last section of alignment is also moved under it. Hope this can help on the disambiguation.

Buffer Layout
-------------

Similar to most Arrow ``Array``\s, the row table consists of three buffers:

- **Null Masks Buffer**: Indicates null values for each column in each row.
- **Fixed-length Buffer**: Stores row data for fixed-length tables or offsets to
  varying-length data for varying-length tables.
- **Varying-length Buffer** (Optional): Contains row data for varying-length
  tables; unused for fixed-length tables.

Row Format
----------

Null Masks
~~~~~~~~~~

> For each row, a contiguous sequence of bits represents whether each column in
> that row is null. Each bit corresponds to a specific column. Unlike the
> convention in Arrow ``Array``\s, in a row table, a value of ``1`` indicates that
> the column is null, and a value of ``0`` indicates valid data. The null mask for
> a row occupies ``RowTableMetadata::null_masks_bytes_per_row`` bytes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each row, a contiguous sequence of bits represents whether each column in
that row is null. Each bit corresponds to a specific column, with ``1``
indicating the value is null and ``0`` indicating the value is valid . Note that
this is the opposite of how the validity bitmap works for Arrays. The null mask
for a row occupies ``RowTableMetadata::null_masks_bytes_per_row`` bytes.
```

Style thing. I like to lead with the fact and qualify after. Feel free to ignore.

Author: Nice modification. Thanks!

Fixed-length Row Data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In a fixed-length row table, row data is directly stored in the fixed-length
buffer. All columns in each row are stored sequentially. Notably, a ``boolean``
column is special because, in a normal Arrow ``Array``, it is stored using 1
bit, whereas in a row table, it occupies 1 byte. The varying-length buffer is
not used in this case.

For example, a row table with the schema ``(int32, boolean)`` and rows
``[[7, false], [8, true], [9, false], ...]`` is stored in the fixed-length
buffer as follows:

> .. list-table::

Reviewer: Doing this with a table works pretty well but I wonder if this wouldn't be more easily understood as ASCII art,

```
      row 1           row 2           row 3
├───────────────┼───────────────┼───────────────┤
 7 0 0 0 0 ? ? ? 8 0 0 0 1 ? ? ? 9 0 0 0 0 ? ? ?
├───────┼─┼─────┼───────┼─┼─────┼───────┼─┼─────┤
 ^       ^ ^     ^       ^       ^       ^ ^
 │       │ │     │       │ │     │       │ │
 int32   │ │     int32   │ │     int32   │ │
         │ │             │ │             │ │
 boolean ┘ │     boolean ┘ │     boolean ┘ │
           │               │               │
   padding ┘       padding ┘       padding ┘
``` 

What do you think?

Author: I like it but it can be really hard to do the "Varying-length buffer (row data)" below :(

Reviewer: Okay. Probably fine as-is then.

.. KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
.. specific language governing permissions and limitations
.. under the License.

.. highlight:: console
.. _development-cpp-compute:

============================
Developing Arrow C++ Compute
============================

This section provides information for developers of the Arrow C++ Compute module.

Row Table
=========

The row table in Arrow represents data stored in row-major format. This format
is particularly useful for scenarios involving random access to individual rows
and where all columns are frequently accessed together. It is especially
advantageous for hash-table keys and facilitates efficient operations such as
grouping and hash joins by optimizing memory access patterns and data locality.

Metadata
--------

A row table is defined by its metadata, ``RowTableMetadata``, which includes
information about its schema, alignment, and derived properties.

The schema specifies the types and order of columns. Each row in the row table
contains the data for each column in that logical order (the physical order may
vary; see :ref:`row-encoding` for details).

> One important property derived from the schema is wether the row table is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One important property derived from the schema is whether the row table is
```

> fixed-length or varying-length. A fixed-length row table contains only

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
fixed-length or variable-length. A fixed-length row table contains only
```

I think `variable-length` is more common if I remember correctly. Does the code use `variable-length`?

Reviewer 3: SGTM

fixed-length columns, while a varying-length row table includes at least one
varying-length column. This distinction determines how data is stored and
accessed in the row table.

Each row in the row table is aligned to ``RowTableMetadata::row_alignment``
bytes. Fixed-length columns with non-power-of-2 lengths are also aligned to
``RowTableMetadata::row_alignment`` bytes. Varying-length columns are aligned to
``RowTableMetadata::string_alignment`` bytes.

Buffer Layout
-------------

> Similar to most Arrow ``Array``\s, the row table consists of three buffers:

Reviewer 2: I personally would remove the `Similar to most Arrow Arrays` part as when I read it the first time my brain wrongly assume that the varying-length buffer could have some similarity to the offsets buffer and the memory layout is quite different when we have varying length columns.
```suggestion
The row table layout consists of three buffers:
```

Reviewer 2: No, you didn't, I did when I read it the first time. I am fine with the current phrasing it's only that the first time reading it I got confused.
- The case of varying-length on row table the `buffer[2]` also contains the variable length offset along with the row data that's were this comparison confused me.

I am marking this as resolved.

- **Null Masks Buffer**: Indicates null values for each column in each row.

> - **Fixed-length Buffer**: Stores row data for fixed-length tables or offsets to

Reviewer 3: fixed-length `tables` or `columns`?

  varying-length data for varying-length tables.
- **Varying-length Buffer** (Optional): Contains row data for varying-length
  tables; unused for fixed-length tables.

Row Format
----------

Null Masks
~~~~~~~~~~

> For each row, a contiguous sequence of bits represents whether each column in

Reviewer 3: Yes, that's better because people may have same confusion as me.

> For each row, a contiguous sequence of bits represents whether each column in

Author: Added a "note" about supported column types in the "metadata" section.
